---

layout: post
title: "Lecture 3: Introduction to statistics and inference."
author: "Mario H. Gonzalez-Sauri"
date: "2022-02-22"
mermaid: true

---

<!--  FORMAT: https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet -->

# Introduction to Statistics for Data Science.

In the first lecture, we learn about the scope of Data Science and in lecture two, we set our minds to use inductive reasoning to analyze patterns in data. In this llecture,we are going to build upon the last two lectures by giving a brief introduction to the powerhouse of Data Science: Statistic Using **R.

## What is statistics?

Suppose you have a question, for instance, what is the proportion of international students in your university? What is the chance of passing a course in econometrics? What is the percentage of expats living in the Netherlands from Latin American origin?... To find an answer to any of these questions you probably will use your inductive reasoning and collect information from friends, the internet and your own experience. However, if you want to convince people that you have a solid answer for some question, you may want to collect some evidence. Namely, to put together or find a dataset suitable to answer your question in an objective manner. Statistics is simply the art of learning from data [(Ross, 2010)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123743886000016). We use objective recollections of certain events to put together a dataset. Statistics is thus the set of methods that we use to answer questions from data.

## Descriptive and Inferential Statistics.

There are two kinds of questions that we can answer from data using statistics. One group of questions, uses  *descriptive statistics* to summarize facts from the given data. For instance, what is the frequency of late arrivals from Utrecht to Amsterdam by train? Which is the most popular song on the Radio? What is the chance of getting divorced after marriage? What is the average time of train arrival? The second group of questions makes use of *inferential statistics* to draw conclusions using the data about an underlying population. For instance, what is the effect of education on income? What is the effect of a vaccine on a variant of COVID-19? What is the change in the outcome variable for one unit of the dependent variable?

# Basics of Descriptive Statistics.

##


